---
title: "Play 2: Apply existing tools to transition from in-person to virtual assistance."
categories: ["tools", "virtual assistance"]
# image: example.png
# visit: https://github.com/socialtechus/playbook/
---

Many traditional eligibility and enrollment services that are done in-person are simply not possible during the public health emergency. To ensure operations continue while protecting the health of government workers and those seeking assistance, existing tools (some low tech and most easily accessible) should be used to provide options to apply online, by phone, video call, or mail to eliminate the need to come into a physical office or find a fax machine or scanner.

#### Best practices for this play
* Use the phone to conduct interviews or assessments, or waive the requirement.
* Accept electronic signatures for applications, renewals, and other forms.
* Make sure that an online service works on all available browsers — Chrome, Firefox, Safari, and Internet Explorer.
* If making outbound calls to clients, work with phone companies to be sure your agency name appears on caller ID, rather than an unfamiliar number clients may not answer.
* Start using an Instant Messaging (IM) platform, which allows clients to quickly communicate with an agency when they have a simple question or need basic information. 	
* Ensure that response times are much shorter for answering an instant message than answering a phone. Individuals are prepared to wait on hold when they reach a call center, but expect an immediate response to an instant message.
* After an action is completed (e.g., document uploaded), provide the client with a confirmation on screen and/or by e-mail.
* Remind clients and assisters to either delete personal information used on a mobile device (including tablets) if it is a shared device or to enable the device’s security features.


#### Resources

* [Improving Customer Service in Health and Human Services Through Technology](https://www.alluma.org/improving-customer-service-health-and-human-services-through-technology), Alluma
* [Benefits access in a pandemic: Helping people from the safety of their homes](https://bdtrust.org/benefits-access-in-a-pandemic-helping-people-from-the-safety-of-their-homes/), Benefits Data Trust
* [Modernizing online enrollment for Michigan’s largest assistance programs](https://www.civilla.com/modernizing-online-enrollment), Civilla 